This is Tuesday, February 26th.
We're at 1108 Neil Pickett, and I have the pleasure of interviewing an old friend, Leo Berner.
To introduce yourself to a listener or a reader, let's begin with a biographical introduction.
Born, growing up, what did family do, where did you go to college?
Take us all the way from beginning to the time you got ready to come to A&M.
Well, I was born in Pasadena, California.
and I was born in Pasadena because the bridge between Pasadena and Azusa washed out in a flood, and my mother was in Pasadena.
I went to Citrus Union High School, whose colors were orange and lemon.
I graduated from Citrus in
Wow, I can't remember.
And then I went to Citrus Junior College for two years.
Then I went to Pomona College.
Graduated from Pomona College in 1943 and went into the Navy.
Majored in?
Oh, I majored in zoology.
Had a minor in physics and a minor in geology.
Now, Pomona was then, as it is now, a highly selective, high-quality liberal arts college?
Yeah.
Their enrollment then was exactly what it is now, about 1,200.
But the minor in physics was a little bit peculiar because I knew I was going in the Navy, so I took navigation, which was in the astronomy
So I had a minor in physics with only taking one true physics course.
After I got out of the Navy, I went to Claremont College, which is a graduate school which draws people from Pomona and Scripps and Harvey Mudd and the various
colleges of the Oxford and the Orangeville.
While I was there, Dr. Roger Revell from the Scripps Institution came around recruiting people
And halfway through my master's degree, I changed majors and went to Scripps Institution.
Almost lost my wife.
All right, changed majors from what to what?
Well, I was getting a secondary education degree, and I changed to oceanography.
And I got two degrees in oceanography from UCLA.
and was on the campus four times.
Scripps was in La Jolla and was a department of UCLA.
I could complete all my residency there.
Now officially it was Scripps, the Scripps Institute?
Institution.
Scripps Institution.
It's an institution run by its inmates.
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Scripps Institution.
are often called institutes by people in the press, mainly.
And you mentioned bride.
You all had gotten married when?
Got married in 1947.
And was this a hometown girl that you had grown up with?
Yeah.
She was one year behind me in high school.
I knew her, but I didn't pay much attention to her.
When I got back from the Navy, my cousin said she was the only girl in town that wasn't married.
So I started going out with her and ended up marrying her.
All right.
So you do your master's and then PhD at Scripps.
At Scripps.
Majoring in?
Oceanography.
But your special area of specialization?
Zoplankton.
What?
Spell it for the typist.
Z-o-o-p-l-a-n-k-t-o-n. All one word.
One word.
How did you come to pick that?
I'm not sure.
I was introduced to Martin Johnson, who was
a copepod expert, C-O-P-E-P-O-D.
He introduced me.
I went down twice visiting.
The first time, he introduced me as Mr. DeWitt, which is my middle name.
And the next year, he introduced me as Mr. Berner.
And the fellow he introduced me to said, yeah, there's a guy here last year who looked just like you.
That person became one of, he and his wife became one of our closest friends.
That's interesting.
From Scripps, I went to the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service and I worked there for a year.
Then I went back to Scripps as
And I took a summer off to teach at the University of Oregon at Coos Bay at their Marine Lab.
And I had a position of temporary acting assistant professor, which I didn't think sounded very prominent.
But while I was there I was offered a job at National Science Foundation.
in the education division, so I went to the National Science Foundation and stayed there for three years.
And then I started looking for a job.
The National Science Foundation just didn't tickle my appetite,
But I did go from a GS-7 to a GS-13 in one year.
It was a pretty good job.
Anyway, I was offered three jobs.
One at Boston College, which is right down in the middle of, no, Boston University, I'm sorry, which is right down in the middle of Boston.
And I just didn't like that.
One at Florida State, and I visited there just before a front came through and it was drizzly and rainy and not very attractive.
I got to A&M just after that front had come through.
It was a gorgeous, cool day.
As far as you know, how did you and A&M make any contact?
Well, Willis Pequenot, who was then department head, asked me to come to A&M, and I came as an administrative scientist.
Now, this was what year?
1964.
Officially, A&M records show me coming in 65.
I don't know what an administrative scientist was, or is, or ever was, but I came with the understanding that I would get a faculty appointment the next year.
And this was an understanding with Andy Suttle, who was then academic vice president.
That's S-U-T-T-L-E. Yeah.
Pequenot is P-E-Q-U-E-G-N-A-T.
Anyway, the...
But how did he know about you?
Who called your name to him?
He was a faculty member at Pomona.
Pequenot was?
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
Then he, I don't know, he bounced all around.
And he was at NSF for a while.
And then he came here.
Did you get phone calls or letters before you came to visit?
Phone calls.
Okay.
Did you come for an interview visit where they looked at you and you looked at them?
Yeah.
What was your impression when you first saw what was here?
Well, I really didn't.
have much of an impression of the university itself.
I was here one day, and I think we went to Tom's Pre-Camp, and then I talked to some people in the department, and it was subtle.
I went back to NSF, got the offer, and we drove from Virginia to
to College Station, took three days, snowed all the way.
Oh, my.
All three days.
And my wife kept asking, what's College Station like?
And when we got to Calvert, I said, it's just about like this.
She broke into tears.
When we got to College Station, it did look a little better than she expected, although there was no downtown.
This is the only salary question.
What was your beginning salary?
I don't have the biggest idea.
Oh, you don't?
I can't remember.
And that first year, you said you were not officially a part of the faculty.
That's right.
And your title was what?
Administrative scientist.
Does that partly mean that you were on research money?
No, I was on the department budget, and I was supposed to administer things.
Well, for example, everybody that had a research grant
one thing.
Anyway, after that first year, the department, then department head, which was Pequenot, recommended me for a faculty position and reminded Suttle that he agreed to that.
And Suttle said, I didn't agree to that.
Well, about that time,
I don't know what happened to Suttle, but Wayne Hall, who was academic, let's back up.
In the interim, we got a new dean in geosciences by the name of Horace Byers, and when Equinoct went to him,
He said, well, I'll do some checking.
And he called a professor that I had at Scripps, who I'd saved from making a fool of himself a couple of times.
A wheel had been hit by a destroyer and drifted into the
and he had said it from the description the reporter gave him.
He'd said it was a sperm whale, and I was standing there waving my arms because I didn't get to look at it, and it was a gray whale.
And then I collected some amphioxus for him and various things that sort of endeared myself to him.
And he gave me a high recommendation, and Dr. Byers went ahead with my faculty appointment.
You were an assistant professor?
Associate.
Associate professor.
Describe the department.
Who were the people that were here then?
Where were the strengths in the department?
Who were the well-known folks?
The department was about how many people?
Oh, gosh, I can't even think.
El Said was here.
Bob Reed, who I had thought of, was here.
Dale Leeper.
That's L-E-I-P-P-E-R. Chipping away behind the scenes.
At that time, meteorology was combined with oceanography.
Bill Clayton, who later became president at UTB Alveston, was here.
We used to go, our offices were all in Goodwin Hall, and we'd go down and sit and talk with Bill Clayton and look through the cracks in the walls
see people walking by.
You couldn't see all the people, but you could see people through the cracks in the walls.
Goodwin Hall was, when I came, all the file cabinets had to be north and south.
If they're east and west, they'd fall open.
And they put steel bars through the building and some big things to keep the walls from falling apart.
And every once in a while, there'd be a big thunk and things would jerk.
When we got a new Xerox machine, they weren't sure the building would hold it.
It was an interesting place.
What kind of office and laboratory facilities did you get at the start?
At the start, I had an office that was about 8 by 12.
It had a window air conditioner in it that was so big that it would freeze you, but it would never dehumidify.
I remember distinctly it was room 103 in Bazell Hall.
Buildings and grounds people came around and renumbered all the rooms.
The men's room was right next to my
office and they named it 103 and they renumbered my office 103A.
So, my, all the graduate students put a sign on 103A to enter it through 103.
So, anyway, that, that went along for a very short time and then George Coonsey asked me
to come to the Graduate College as an assistant dean.
But before you do that, let's go back to talking about the department and so forth.
What kind of status did the oceanography have here on a national basis when you came?
I can't honestly answer that, Haskell.
But Woods Hole and Scripps would have been the...
They were the one and two.
Yeah.
But would we have been considered a big leaguer?
Or were we a beginner beginner?
Well, we were on a par probably with Washington and Oregon and Florida State.
I think that's probably still the case.
I'm not sure.
But are you saying we would have been in the top ten?
Yeah, we were probably in the top ten.
We turned out more students, PhD students, than anybody.
At that time, what were the department's predominant strengths?
What areas of specialization?
Physical was the biggest strength, and still is, in my opinion.
Biological was probably next, although geology was strong.
And chemistry was just so-so.
Who were the most respected scholars in the department?
Probably Bob Reed, and I can't remember when, who came, and that sort of thing, but Worth Nowlin certainly was a well-respected person.
That's K-N-O-W-L-I-N?
No, N-O-W-I-N. N-O-W-I-N.
Okay.
Nowlin.
And Syed El-Syed grew a big reputation
and primarily in Antarctic work.
I won't say much more about that.
Where and the research facilities on the Gulf were where?
We docked our ship in Galveston.
down in commercial docks.
There was one restaurant bar where you could always find the crew members if you couldn't find them on the ship.
Then, as they developed UT Galveston, we moved on our ship operations over there.
Now, the program here in oceanography had begun after World War II?
Actually, it began during World War II, I think.
Well, we had our 50th anniversary about three years ago.
Late 40s.
40s, yeah.
Right.
And the course offerings were graduate.
There were no undergraduate degree in oceanography, was there?
No.
And there still is.
By and large, when you came, where did the A&M graduate students in oceanography, where had they done their undergraduate work?
All over.
All over?
We had students from Denton, and we had students from California colleges.
Were there many international students?
Yes, there were quite a few international students.
Where?
Primarily Chinese.
There were very many Indians, a few.
And your first teaching assignments were what?
What courses?
What areas?
Well, research was the big one, and then oceanography 620, which was marine zooplankton.
Marine zooplankton?
Is that what you said?
I think so.
I can't even remember the name of the course.
What was your impression of the quality of the students?
The quality of the students was very good.
And I think that's been borne out by where they've ended up.
And was it clear that you were expected to develop your own research funding sources?
Yes.
That got all messed up by the fact that I went over to graduate college as a part-time dean.
But before that time, yeah.
Well, it wasn't much before that.
By and large, where did the oceanography funding, research funding come from?
Our biggest source of funding was the Office of Naval Research.
There was some funding from National Science Foundation.
That's about it.
Now in this part of the United States, where else were there similar programs?
Florida State would have been the only one.
Okay.
Nobody else in Texas then?
LSU not then?
Not then.
Port Aransas Lab, University of Texas was a summertime thing.
Was there any programs in oceanography that clearly was the model that A&M was using?
Was it trying to be kind of like?
No, I don't think so.
A&M was doing its own thing.
And, you know, that's the thing that bothers me.
Was it planned 2000 or no?
2020.
They're all trying to emulate somebody, and they don't look at A&M's strengths and build on them.
To think that A&M should emulate MIT is absolutely absurd.
When you first came, who were your first good friends, professional friends?
Bill Clayton was one.
I was trying to think who in the world.
There were three of us, and I can't think of who the third one was.
It's pretty bad.
And that trio, what did you all do together?
Oh we'd go to lunch together.
Where?
At Sabisa Hall.
Or what's the other one?
Duncan?
Duncan.
Oh, and we used to go to the MSC, too, because Wayne Stark had a very good restaurant over there.
As a matter of fact, it was the best restaurant in town.
What was, as you and your, did you have children yet?
Yeah, we had two when we came.
When you came, describe finding a place to live.
We rented a place on Dominick Drive, which the department had found for us.
And we lived there a year, and that year we built this place.
Do you remember what it cost?
$250 a month.
What was your impression, your family's impression of College Station as you settled in?
Well, one daughter, the one who was in eighth grade, really didn't move.
The younger daughter really got into things and got involved.
I think my daughter, who was in the eighth grade, coasted through the whole eighth grade because the schools they'd attended in Virginia were
much much advanced than what was in college station at that time now my ear understood you to say that your older daughter didn't move what well she moved but oh mentally oh oh okay i see what you mean i see what you she still was with her friends back then and what did y'all how easy was it to make friends in the community uh we made a lot of friends
up and down the street, and a church, but beyond that we didn't make many friends in the community.
At which church?
A&M Presbyterian.
Were you Presbyterians before you came?
Yes.
Okay, so that was a natural.
Describe that church then.
It was an interesting place, I guess.
The pastor was one that had been here quite a while.
Was it Anderson?
No, it was Fisher.
Fisher?
Fisher.
And anyway, I ended up on the diaconate.
And they wanted to remodel the church.
So they spent $50,000 to get an architect's plans to remodel the church.
Then went ahead and did it on their own, at which point
I resigned from the church.
$50,000 down the drain.
About how big was the congregation then?
Oh, it must have been about 100, I can't say.
It was full of...
Located at Northgate.
Yeah.
And they, what, a few years ago sold that for
private dormitory and got a lot of money.
It's now part of another church.
After I left the Presbyterian Church I was so fed up with organized religion I didn't
church for four or five years and then we started going to first presbytery in berlin what other uh in the community what other things did y'all get involved in early
Well, there was a quasi-faculty club in the Ramada Inn that we got involved in.
Which then, the Ramada Inn over on the northeast corner of the campus at... University.
In Texas.
Texas, yeah.
And we were in the band boosters that consolidated.